Reformatting and review of comparison page between SQL and Cypher (#415)
neo4j/docs-getting-started: modules/ROOT/pages/reference/graphdb-concepts/cypher-sql.adoc

= Comparing Cypher with SQL
:tags: cypher, queries, graph-queries, sql-cypher, northwind-graph
:aura_signup: https://neo4j.com/cloud/aura/?ref=developer-guide
:description: This guide teaches anyone familiar with SQL how to write the equivalent, efficient Cypher statements. We'll use the well-known Northwind database to explain the concepts and work through the queries from simple to advanced.
:page-ad-overline-link: https://graphacademy.neo4j.com/?ref=guides
:page-ad-overline: Neo4j GraphAcademy
:page-ad-title: Cypher Fundamentals
:page-ad-description: Learn Cypher in this free, hands-on course
:page-ad-link: https://graphacademy.neo4j.com/?ref=guides
:page-ad-underline-role: button
:page-ad-underline: Learn more

.A comparison between the relational and graph models of the Northwind dataset, when considering the data structures in the following queries.
image::relational-vs-graph.svg[]

This page shows anyone familiar with SQL how to understand Cypher and write the equivalent Cypher queries.
It uses the Northwind dataset as an example for the comparison.

> Refer to xref:reference/example-data.adoc[Example datasets] to learn how to load it to your Neo4j instance.

Reviewer: True, we could probably just say "...to learn how to use the example datasets."

[TIP]
====
For a more in-depth explanation on the differences and similarities between graph and relational databases, see xref:reference/graphdb-concepts/graphdb-vs-rdbms.adoc[Transition from relational to graph database].
====

== Query examples

Here is a list of query examples and how they compare between SQL and Cypher.

=== Select and return records

[options=header,cols='1,1']
|===

| SQL
| Cypher

a| To select and return records in SQL, you would select everything from the `products` table:
[source, plsql]
----
SELECT p.*
FROM products as p;
----

a| In Cypher, you `MATCH` a simple pattern: all nodes with the *label* `:Product` and `RETURN` them:
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
RETURN p;
----
|===

=== Field access, ordering, and paging

> It is more efficient to return only a subset of attributes, like `ProductName` and `UnitPrice` in case you want to order items.

Author: This was already written in the original content. I'm not so sure either, but I think it means that in SQL you would need to scan the whole dataset for a certain information, while it would be more efficient to scan only specific tables (in this case, ProductName and UnitPrice)... however, we could it make more clear that we want to order things after their price here, upfront the example.

> It is more efficient to return only a subset of attributes, like `ProductName` and `UnitPrice` in case you want to order items.

Reviewer: How about this:
Rather than returning **all** attributes, you can filter out the ones you are interested in, `ProductName` and `UnitPrice` for example.
You can also order by price and only return the ten most expensive items.

[options=header,cols='1,1']
|===

| SQL
| Cypher

a| In SQL, if you look at the employees per territory, then the territory information is returned for each employee:

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT e.LastName, et.Description
FROM Employee AS e
JOIN EmployeeTerritory AS et ON (et.EmployeeID = e.EmployeeID)
JOIN Territory AS t ON (et.TerritoryID = t.TerritoryID);
----

a| In Cypher, you can either return the structure like in SQL or use the `collect()` aggregation function, which aggregates values into a collection (list, array).
This way, only one row per parent, containing an inlined collection of child values, is returned:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (t:Territory)<-[:IN_TERRITORY]-(e:Employee)
RETURN t.territoryDescription, collect(e.lastName);
----

[NOTE]
====
This also works for nested values.
====
|===

=== Product categories

If you have to express category, territory or organizational hierarchies in SQL, it is usually modeled with a self-join via a foreign key from child to parent.

> Taking the example of the product categories, you have to decide upfront up to how many levels of categories you want to query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example of the product categories, you have to decide upfront how many levels of categories you want to query.
```

----

a| In Cypher, the `LIKE` operator is replaced by the `STARTS WITH`, `CONTAINS`, and `ENDS WITH` operators:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
WHERE p.productName STARTS WITH 'C' AND p.unitPrice > 100
RETURN p.productName, p.unitPrice;
----
You can also use a regular expression:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
WHERE p.productName =~ '^C.*'
RETURN p.productName, p.unitPrice
----
|===

=== Joining products with customers

[options=header,cols='1,1']
|===

| SQL
| Cypher

a| In SQL, if you want to see who bought `Chocolade`, you can join the four tables together:

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT DISTINCT c.CompanyName
FROM customers AS c
JOIN orders AS o ON (c.CustomerID = o.CustomerID)
JOIN order_details AS od ON (o.OrderID = od.OrderID)
JOIN products AS p ON (od.ProductID = p.ProductID)
WHERE p.ProductName = 'Chocolade';
----

a| In Cypher, there is no need to `JOIN` tables.
You can express connections as graph patterns instead:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product {productName:'Chocolade'})<-[:ORDERS]-(:Order)<-[:PURCHASED]-(c:Customer)
RETURN DISTINCT c.companyName;
----
|===

=== Return customers without existing orders

> If you instead want to see **who** bought **what** and what did they **pay in total**, the `JOIN` in the previous SQL query stays the same, only the filter expression changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you instead want to see **who** bought **what** and what they **paid in total**, the `JOIN` in the previous SQL query stays the same, only the filter expression changes.
```

Reviewer: I think I suggested the first construction, but it's not correct. Sorry, this is how it should be.

Author: np! it's fixed now! :)))
